content/docs/concepts/terminology.mdx, before:

---
title: Terminology
description: A glossary of key terms, concepts, and jargon used within the ObjectStack ecosystem.
---


To navigate the ObjectStack ecosystem effectively, it is helpful to understand the specific vocabulary we use. While many terms are standard in computer science, some have specific nuances in our "Protocol-Driven" context.

## The Ecosystem

### ObjectStack
The umbrella term for the entire suite of protocols and reference implementations. It encompasses the Data Layer (ObjectQL), the UI Layer (ObjectUI), and the Operating System (ObjectOS).

### ObjectQL (The Data Protocol)
A database-agnostic protocol for defining data structures and querying them. Unlike GraphQL (which is an API spec), ObjectQL is a **Database Compiler** that translates abstract intent into dialect-specific SQL (e.g., PostgreSQL, SQLite).

### ObjectUI (The View Protocol)
A JSON-based specification for describing user interfaces. It follows the **Server-Driven UI (SDUI)** pattern, where the backend dictates the layout, hierarchy, and behavior, and the frontend (React/Flutter) acts as a renderer.

### ObjectOS (The Kernel)
The runtime environment that orchestrates the ecosystem. It manages identity, plugin lifecycles, workflow execution, and data synchronization between client and server.

---

## Architecture Concepts

### Protocol-Driven
A development paradigm where logic is defined in static, declarative data formats (JSON/YAML) rather than imperative code. The goal is to separate the **Intent** (Business Logic) from the **Implementation** (Tech Stack).

### Local-First
An architectural pattern where the application reads and writes to a database embedded on the user's device (the Client) first. Network synchronization happens in the background. This ensures zero-latency interactions and offline availability.

### Database Compiler
A system that takes a high-level query AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) and compiles it into an optimized database query string (e.g., SQL). This contrasts with an ORM, which typically acts as a runtime wrapper object.

### Virtual Column
A field defined in the ObjectQL schema that does not exist physically in the database table but is computed on the fly.
* *Example:* A SQL subquery or expression injected into the `SELECT` statement at compile time.

---

## Data & Schema

### Object (Entity)
The fundamental unit of data modeling in ObjectStack. Roughly equivalent to a "Table" in SQL or a "Collection" in NoSQL. An Object definition includes Fields, Actions, Triggers, and Permissions.

### Driver
An adapter plugin that allows ObjectQL to talk to a specific underlying storage engine.
* *Example:* `@objectql/driver-postgres`, `@objectql/driver-sqlite`.

### AST (Abstract Syntax Tree)
The intermediate representation of a query or schema. ObjectQL parses a JSON request into an AST before the Compiler translates it into SQL. This allows for security injection and analysis before execution.

### Manifest
The entry point configuration file (usually `package.json` or `manifest.json`) for an ObjectOS Plugin. It declares dependencies, creates resources, and registers extensions.

---

## Interface & Logic

### Layout
A JSON structure defined in ObjectUI that describes the visual arrangement of components. Layouts can be nested and dynamic (e.g., Master-Detail, Grid, Kanban).

### Workflow
A business process defined as a **Finite State Machine (FSM)**. It consists of States (e.g., `draft`, `approved`), Transitions, and Guards.

### Action
A discrete unit of logic that can be triggered by a user (UI button) or a system event (Workflow transition). Actions are often defined in the schema and implemented in TypeScript.

### Component Registry
A map within the ObjectUI Runtime that links a string identifier (e.g., `"chart.bar"`) to a real React Component. This allows the JSON protocol to instantiate UI elements dynamically.

---

## Governance

### Space (Workspace)
A logical isolation unit for multi-tenancy. A single ObjectOS instance can host multiple Spaces. Data is physically segregated by a `space_id` column.

### FLS (Field-Level Security)
A granular permission model where access control is applied to individual fields (columns), not just the whole object (row).

### TCK (Technology Compatibility Kit)
A suite of tests that validates if a Driver or Renderer complies with the official ObjectStack Protocol. If a new driver passes the TCK, it is certified as compatible.

Commit message:

Revise and expand core ObjectStack concept docs
Major updates to AI Codex, architecture, core values, enterprise patterns, manifesto, security architecture, and terminology docs. Improvements include richer examples, new sections on database agnosticism and security protocols, expanded enterprise patterns, and enhanced explanations of ObjectStack's protocol-driven approach. Also includes UI enhancements with icon imports and card/callout components for better readability.

content/docs/concepts/terminology.mdx, after:

---
title: Terminology
description: The Glossary of the ObjectStack Ecosystem. Speaking the same language.
---

import { Book, Server, Code, Database } from 'lucide-react';

To navigate the ObjectStack ecosystem effectively, it is helpful to understand the specific vocabulary we use. While many terms are standard in computer science, some have specific nuances in our "Protocol-Driven" context.

## The Ecosystem

### ObjectStack
The umbrella term for the entire suite of protocols and reference implementations. It encompasses the Data Layer (ObjectQL), the UI Layer (ObjectUI), and the Operating System (ObjectOS).

### ObjectQL (The Data Protocol)
A database-agnostic protocol for defining data structures and querying them. Unlike GraphQL (which is an API spec), ObjectQL is a **Database Compiler** that translates abstract intent into dialect-specific SQL (e.g., PostgreSQL, SQLite).

### ObjectUI (The View Protocol)
A JSON-based specification for describing user interfaces. It follows the **Server-Driven UI (SDUI)** pattern, where the backend dictates the layout, hierarchy, and behavior, and the frontend (React/Flutter) acts as a renderer.

### ObjectOS (The Kernel)
The runtime environment that orchestrates the ecosystem. It manages identity, plugin lifecycles, workflow execution, and data synchronization between client and server.

---

## Architecture Concepts

### Protocol-Driven
A development paradigm where logic is defined in static, declarative data formats (JSON/YAML) rather than imperative code. The goal is to separate the **Intent** (Business Logic) from the **Implementation** (Tech Stack).

### Local-First
An architectural pattern where the application reads and writes to a database embedded on the user's device (the Client) first. Network synchronization happens in the background. This ensures zero-latency interactions and offline availability.

### Database Compiler
A system that takes a high-level query AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) and compiles it into an optimized database query string (e.g., SQL). This contrasts with an ORM, which typically acts as a runtime wrapper object.

### Virtual Field
A field defined in the ObjectQL schema that does not exist physically in the database table but is computed on the fly.
* *Example:* A SQL subquery or expression injected into the `SELECT` statement at compile time.

---

## Data & Schema

### Object (Entity)
The fundamental unit of data modeling in ObjectStack. Roughly equivalent to a "Table" in SQL or a "Collection" in NoSQL. An Object definition includes Fields, Actions, Triggers, and Permissions.

### Driver
An adapter plugin that allows ObjectQL to talk to a specific underlying storage engine.
* *Example:* `@objectql/driver-postgres`, `@objectql/driver-sqlite`.

### AST (Abstract Syntax Tree)
The intermediate representation of a query or schema. ObjectQL parses a JSON request into an AST before the Compiler translates it into SQL. This allows for security injection and analysis before execution.

### Manifest
The entry point configuration file (usually `package.json` or `manifest.json`) for an ObjectOS Plugin. It declares dependencies, creates resources, and registers extensions.

---

## Interface & Logic

### Layout
A JSON structure defined in ObjectUI that describes the visual arrangement of components. Layouts can be nested and dynamic (e.g., Master-Detail, Grid, Kanban).

### Workflow
A business process defined as a **Finite State Machine (FSM)**. It consists of States (e.g., `draft`, `approved`), Transitions, and Guards.

### Action
A discrete unit of logic that can be triggered by a user (UI button) or a system event (Workflow transition). Actions are often defined in the schema and implemented in TypeScript.

### Component Registry
A map within the ObjectUI Runtime that links a string identifier (e.g., `"chart.bar"`) to a real React Component. This allows the JSON protocol to instantiate UI elements dynamically.

---

## Governance

### Space (Workspace)
A logical isolation unit for multi-tenancy. A single ObjectOS instance can host multiple Spaces. Data is physically segregated by a `space_id` column.

### FLS (Field-Level Security)
A granular permission model where access control is applied to individual fields (columns), not just the whole object (row).

### TCK (Technology Compatibility Kit)
A suite of tests that validates if a Driver or Renderer complies with the official ObjectStack Protocol. If a new driver passes the TCK, it is certified as compatible.
