content/docs/references/ui/view.mdx, before:

---
title: View
description: View protocol schemas
---

HTTP Method Enum

<Callout type="info">
**Source:** `packages/spec/src/ui/view.zod.ts`
</Callout>

## TypeScript Usage

```typescript
import { CalendarConfig, FormField, FormSection, FormView, GanttConfig, HttpMethod, HttpRequest, KanbanConfig, ListColumn, ListView, NavigationConfig, NavigationMode, PaginationConfig, SelectionConfig, View, ViewData } from '@objectstack/spec/ui';
import type { CalendarConfig, FormField, FormSection, FormView, GanttConfig, HttpMethod, HttpRequest, KanbanConfig, ListColumn, ListView, NavigationConfig, NavigationMode, PaginationConfig, SelectionConfig, View, ViewData } from '@objectstack/spec/ui';

// Validate data
const result = CalendarConfig.parse(data);
```

---

## CalendarConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **startDateField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **endDateField** | `string` | optional |  |
| **titleField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **colorField** | `string` | optional |  |


---

## FormField

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **field** | `string` | ✅ | Field name (snake_case) |
| **label** | `string` | optional | Display label override |
| **placeholder** | `string` | optional | Placeholder text |
| **helpText** | `string` | optional | Help/hint text |
| **readonly** | `boolean` | optional | Read-only override |
| **required** | `boolean` | optional | Required override |
| **hidden** | `boolean` | optional | Hidden override |
| **colSpan** | `integer` | optional | Column span in grid layout (1-4) |
| **widget** | `string` | optional | Custom widget/component name |
| **dependsOn** | `string` | optional | Parent field name for cascading |
| **visibleOn** | `string` | optional | Visibility condition expression |


---

## FormSection

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **label** | `string` | optional |  |
| **collapsible** | `boolean` | optional |  |
| **collapsed** | `boolean` | optional |  |
| **columns** | `Enum<'1' \| '2' \| '3' \| '4'>` | optional |  |
| **fields** | `string \| Object[]` | ✅ |  |


---

## FormView

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **type** | `Enum<'simple' \| 'tabbed' \| 'wizard' \| 'split' \| 'drawer' \| 'modal'>` | optional |  |
| **data** | `Object \| Object \| Object` | optional | Data source configuration (defaults to "object" provider) |
| **sections** | `Object[]` | optional |  |
| **groups** | `Object[]` | optional |  |


---

## GanttConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **startDateField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **endDateField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **titleField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **progressField** | `string` | optional |  |
| **dependenciesField** | `string` | optional |  |


---

## HttpMethod

### Allowed Values

* `GET`
* `POST`
* `PUT`
* `PATCH`
* `DELETE`


---

## HttpRequest

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **url** | `string` | ✅ | API endpoint URL |
| **method** | `Enum<'GET' \| 'POST' \| 'PUT' \| 'PATCH' \| 'DELETE'>` | optional | HTTP method |
| **headers** | `Record<string, string>` | optional | Custom HTTP headers |
| **params** | `Record<string, any>` | optional | Query parameters |
| **body** | `any` | optional | Request body for POST/PUT/PATCH |


---

## KanbanConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **groupByField** | `string` | ✅ | Field to group columns by (usually status/select) |
| **summarizeField** | `string` | optional | Field to sum at top of column (e.g. amount) |
| **columns** | `string[]` | ✅ | Fields to show on cards |


---

## ListColumn

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **field** | `string` | ✅ | Field name (snake_case) |
| **label** | `string` | optional | Display label override |
| **width** | `number` | optional | Column width in pixels |
| **align** | `Enum<'left' \| 'center' \| 'right'>` | optional | Text alignment |
| **hidden** | `boolean` | optional | Hide column by default |
| **sortable** | `boolean` | optional | Allow sorting by this column |
| **resizable** | `boolean` | optional | Allow resizing this column |
| **wrap** | `boolean` | optional | Allow text wrapping |
| **type** | `string` | optional | Renderer type override (e.g., "currency", "date") |
| **link** | `boolean` | optional | Functions as the primary navigation link (triggers View navigation) |
| **action** | `string` | optional | Registered Action ID to execute when clicked |


---

## ListView

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **name** | `string` | optional | Internal view name (lowercase snake_case) |
| **label** | `string` | optional |  |
| **type** | `Enum<'grid' \| 'kanban' \| 'gallery' \| 'calendar' \| 'timeline' \| 'gantt' \| 'map'>` | optional |  |
| **data** | `Object \| Object \| Object` | optional | Data source configuration (defaults to "object" provider) |
| **columns** | `string[] \| Object[]` | ✅ | Fields to display as columns |
| **filter** | `any[]` | optional | Filter criteria (JSON Rules) |
| **sort** | `string \| Object[]` | optional |  |
| **searchableFields** | `string[]` | optional | Fields enabled for search |
| **resizable** | `boolean` | optional | Enable column resizing |
| **striped** | `boolean` | optional | Striped row styling |
| **bordered** | `boolean` | optional | Show borders |
| **selection** | `Object` | optional | Row selection configuration |
| **navigation** | `Object` | optional | Configuration for item click navigation (page, drawer, modal, etc.) |
| **pagination** | `Object` | optional | Pagination configuration |
| **kanban** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **calendar** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **gantt** | `Object` | optional |  |


---

## NavigationConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **mode** | `Enum<'page' \| 'drawer' \| 'modal' \| 'split' \| 'popover' \| 'new_window' \| 'none'>` | optional |  |
| **view** | `string` | optional | Name of the form view to use for details (e.g. "summary_view", "edit_form") |
| **preventNavigation** | `boolean` | optional | Disable standard navigation entirely |
| **openNewTab** | `boolean` | optional | Force open in new tab (applies to page mode) |
| **width** | `string \| number` | optional | Width of the drawer/modal (e.g. "600px", "50%") |


---

## NavigationMode

### Allowed Values

* `page`
* `drawer`
* `modal`
* `split`
* `popover`
* `new_window`
* `none`


---

## PaginationConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **pageSize** | `integer` | optional | Number of records per page |
| **pageSizeOptions** | `integer[]` | optional | Available page size options |


---

## SelectionConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **type** | `Enum<'none' \| 'single' \| 'multiple'>` | optional | Selection mode |


---

## View

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **list** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **form** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **listViews** | `Record<string, Object>` | optional | Additional named list views |
| **formViews** | `Record<string, Object>` | optional | Additional named form views |


---

## ViewData

### Union Options

This schema accepts one of the following structures:

#### Option 1

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **provider** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **object** | `string` | ✅ | Target object name |

---

#### Option 2

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **provider** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **read** | `Object` | optional | Configuration for fetching data |
| **write** | `Object` | optional | Configuration for submitting data (for forms/editable tables) |

---

#### Option 3

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **provider** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **items** | `any[]` | ✅ | Static data array |

---


---

Commit message:

feat(metadata): add filterableFields property to JSON schemas for enhanced user filtering

content/docs/references/ui/view.mdx, after:

---
title: View
description: View protocol schemas
---

HTTP Method Enum

<Callout type="info">
**Source:** `packages/spec/src/ui/view.zod.ts`
</Callout>

## TypeScript Usage

```typescript
import { CalendarConfig, FormField, FormSection, FormView, GanttConfig, HttpMethod, HttpRequest, KanbanConfig, ListColumn, ListView, NavigationConfig, NavigationMode, PaginationConfig, SelectionConfig, View, ViewData } from '@objectstack/spec/ui';
import type { CalendarConfig, FormField, FormSection, FormView, GanttConfig, HttpMethod, HttpRequest, KanbanConfig, ListColumn, ListView, NavigationConfig, NavigationMode, PaginationConfig, SelectionConfig, View, ViewData } from '@objectstack/spec/ui';

// Validate data
const result = CalendarConfig.parse(data);
```

---

## CalendarConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **startDateField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **endDateField** | `string` | optional |  |
| **titleField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **colorField** | `string` | optional |  |


---

## FormField

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **field** | `string` | ✅ | Field name (snake_case) |
| **label** | `string` | optional | Display label override |
| **placeholder** | `string` | optional | Placeholder text |
| **helpText** | `string` | optional | Help/hint text |
| **readonly** | `boolean` | optional | Read-only override |
| **required** | `boolean` | optional | Required override |
| **hidden** | `boolean` | optional | Hidden override |
| **colSpan** | `integer` | optional | Column span in grid layout (1-4) |
| **widget** | `string` | optional | Custom widget/component name |
| **dependsOn** | `string` | optional | Parent field name for cascading |
| **visibleOn** | `string` | optional | Visibility condition expression |


---

## FormSection

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **label** | `string` | optional |  |
| **collapsible** | `boolean` | optional |  |
| **collapsed** | `boolean` | optional |  |
| **columns** | `Enum<'1' \| '2' \| '3' \| '4'>` | optional |  |
| **fields** | `string \| Object[]` | ✅ |  |


---

## FormView

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **type** | `Enum<'simple' \| 'tabbed' \| 'wizard' \| 'split' \| 'drawer' \| 'modal'>` | optional |  |
| **data** | `Object \| Object \| Object` | optional | Data source configuration (defaults to "object" provider) |
| **sections** | `Object[]` | optional |  |
| **groups** | `Object[]` | optional |  |


---

## GanttConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **startDateField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **endDateField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **titleField** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **progressField** | `string` | optional |  |
| **dependenciesField** | `string` | optional |  |


---

## HttpMethod

### Allowed Values

* `GET`
* `POST`
* `PUT`
* `PATCH`
* `DELETE`


---

## HttpRequest

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **url** | `string` | ✅ | API endpoint URL |
| **method** | `Enum<'GET' \| 'POST' \| 'PUT' \| 'PATCH' \| 'DELETE'>` | optional | HTTP method |
| **headers** | `Record<string, string>` | optional | Custom HTTP headers |
| **params** | `Record<string, any>` | optional | Query parameters |
| **body** | `any` | optional | Request body for POST/PUT/PATCH |


---

## KanbanConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **groupByField** | `string` | ✅ | Field to group columns by (usually status/select) |
| **summarizeField** | `string` | optional | Field to sum at top of column (e.g. amount) |
| **columns** | `string[]` | ✅ | Fields to show on cards |


---

## ListColumn

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **field** | `string` | ✅ | Field name (snake_case) |
| **label** | `string` | optional | Display label override |
| **width** | `number` | optional | Column width in pixels |
| **align** | `Enum<'left' \| 'center' \| 'right'>` | optional | Text alignment |
| **hidden** | `boolean` | optional | Hide column by default |
| **sortable** | `boolean` | optional | Allow sorting by this column |
| **resizable** | `boolean` | optional | Allow resizing this column |
| **wrap** | `boolean` | optional | Allow text wrapping |
| **type** | `string` | optional | Renderer type override (e.g., "currency", "date") |
| **link** | `boolean` | optional | Functions as the primary navigation link (triggers View navigation) |
| **action** | `string` | optional | Registered Action ID to execute when clicked |


---

## ListView

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **name** | `string` | optional | Internal view name (lowercase snake_case) |
| **label** | `string` | optional |  |
| **type** | `Enum<'grid' \| 'kanban' \| 'gallery' \| 'calendar' \| 'timeline' \| 'gantt' \| 'map'>` | optional |  |
| **data** | `Object \| Object \| Object` | optional | Data source configuration (defaults to "object" provider) |
| **columns** | `string[] \| Object[]` | ✅ | Fields to display as columns |
| **filter** | `any[]` | optional | Filter criteria (JSON Rules) |
| **sort** | `string \| Object[]` | optional |  |
| **searchableFields** | `string[]` | optional | Fields enabled for search |
| **filterableFields** | `string[]` | optional | Fields enabled for end-user filtering in the top bar |
| **resizable** | `boolean` | optional | Enable column resizing |
| **striped** | `boolean` | optional | Striped row styling |
| **bordered** | `boolean` | optional | Show borders |
| **selection** | `Object` | optional | Row selection configuration |
| **navigation** | `Object` | optional | Configuration for item click navigation (page, drawer, modal, etc.) |
| **pagination** | `Object` | optional | Pagination configuration |
| **kanban** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **calendar** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **gantt** | `Object` | optional |  |


---

## NavigationConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **mode** | `Enum<'page' \| 'drawer' \| 'modal' \| 'split' \| 'popover' \| 'new_window' \| 'none'>` | optional |  |
| **view** | `string` | optional | Name of the form view to use for details (e.g. "summary_view", "edit_form") |
| **preventNavigation** | `boolean` | optional | Disable standard navigation entirely |
| **openNewTab** | `boolean` | optional | Force open in new tab (applies to page mode) |
| **width** | `string \| number` | optional | Width of the drawer/modal (e.g. "600px", "50%") |


---

## NavigationMode

### Allowed Values

* `page`
* `drawer`
* `modal`
* `split`
* `popover`
* `new_window`
* `none`


---

## PaginationConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **pageSize** | `integer` | optional | Number of records per page |
| **pageSizeOptions** | `integer[]` | optional | Available page size options |


---

## SelectionConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **type** | `Enum<'none' \| 'single' \| 'multiple'>` | optional | Selection mode |


---

## View

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **list** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **form** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **listViews** | `Record<string, Object>` | optional | Additional named list views |
| **formViews** | `Record<string, Object>` | optional | Additional named form views |


---

## ViewData

### Union Options

This schema accepts one of the following structures:

#### Option 1

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **provider** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **object** | `string` | ✅ | Target object name |

---

#### Option 2

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **provider** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **read** | `Object` | optional | Configuration for fetching data |
| **write** | `Object` | optional | Configuration for submitting data (for forms/editable tables) |

---

#### Option 3

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **provider** | `string` | ✅ |  |
| **items** | `any[]` | ✅ | Static data array |

---


---
