content/docs/framework/index.mdx, before:

---
title: ObjectStack Framework
description: The reference implementation of the ObjectStack Protocol
---

# ObjectStack Framework

While the **Protocol** (`@objectstack/spec`) defines the "DNA" of the system, the **Framework** is the actual software implementation that executes these protocols.

The Framework provides the kernels, runtimes, engines, and drivers necessary to build a running application from your metadata definitions.

## Key Components

### 1. The Core Kernel
The `@objectstack/core` package is the microkernel that provides:
- **Plugin System**: Dynamic loading and lifecycle management.
- **Dependency Injection**: Service registration and resolution.
- **Event Bus**: System-wide event emission and handling.

### 2. The Runtime Support
The `@objectstack/runtime` package implements the universal `HttpDispatcher` and server logic:
- **Unified Dispatcher**: Handles Data, UI, and Auth requests via a standard interface.
- **Protocol Adapter**: Adapts HTTP requests (Hono, Next.js) to internal protocol calls.

### 3. The Client Ecosystem
- **Local Development**: `@objectstack/cli` for scaffolding and running apps.
- **Frontend Integration**: `@objectstack/client` and `@objectstack/client-react` for building UIs.

## Documentation Structure

- **[Packages](./packages)**: Detailed reference of all npm packages in the monorepo.
- **[CLI](./cli)**: Command-line interface usage guide.
- **[Client SDK](./client-sdk)**: TypeScript client and React hooks documentation.

Commit message:

feat: Update package documentation and add new protocols
- Updated the package reference documentation to reflect the addition of 5 new packages, increasing the total from 10 to 15.
- Enhanced CLI documentation with new commands and features for better developer experience.
- Introduced new protocol schemas for package registry and state machine, including TypeScript usage examples.
- Added lifecycle properties to AI agent schemas for improved state management.
- Expanded automation protocols with new event and state machine definitions.
- Cleaned up and organized kernel documentation, including new package registry details.
- Removed unused example dependencies from pnpm lock file to streamline package management.

content/docs/framework/index.mdx, after:

---
title: ObjectStack Framework
description: The reference implementation of the ObjectStack Protocol
---

# ObjectStack Framework

While the **Protocol** (`@objectstack/spec`) defines the "DNA" of the system, the **Framework** is the actual software implementation that executes these protocols.

The Framework provides the kernels, runtimes, engines, drivers, and developer tools necessary to build a running application from your metadata definitions.

## Key Components

### 1. The Core Kernel
The `@objectstack/core` package is the microkernel that provides:
- **Plugin System**: Dynamic loading and lifecycle management.
- **Dependency Injection**: Service registration and resolution.
- **Event Bus**: System-wide event emission and handling.

### 2. The Runtime Support
The `@objectstack/runtime` package implements the universal `HttpDispatcher` and server logic:
- **Unified Dispatcher**: Handles Data, UI, and Auth requests via a standard interface.
- **Protocol Adapter**: Adapts HTTP requests (Hono, Next.js, NestJS) to internal protocol calls.

### 3. The Developer Toolchain
The `@objectstack/cli` provides a complete development workflow:
- **Scaffolding**: `os init` and `os generate` for project and metadata creation.
- **Validation**: `os validate` for schema checking with `--strict` and `--json` modes.
- **Introspection**: `os info` for metadata summary and `os doctor` for environment health.
- **Build**: `os compile` for production artifact generation.
- **Server**: `os serve` and `os dev` for development with auto-plugin detection.

### 4. The Client Ecosystem
- **Frontend Integration**: `@objectstack/client` and `@objectstack/client-react` for building UIs.
- **Query Builder**: Type-safe query construction with `QueryBuilder` and `FilterBuilder`.

## Documentation Structure

- **[Core (Microkernel)](./core)**: Architecture, plugins, services, and events.
- **[Packages](./packages)**: Detailed reference of all 15 npm packages in the monorepo.
- **[CLI](./cli)**: Command-line interface usage guide with all 10 commands.
- **[Client SDK](./client-sdk)**: TypeScript client and React hooks documentation.
- **[Driver Configuration](./driver-configuration)**: Database driver setup and configuration.
