packages/spec/README.md, before:

# @objectstack/spec

ObjectStack Protocol & Specification — The "Constitution" of the Ecosystem.

[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.3-blue.svg)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## 📜 Mission

This package defines the **DNA** of ObjectStack. It contains:
1.  **Zod Schemas**: Runtime validation for the Kernel and CLI.
2.  **TypeScript Interfaces**: `z.infer<>` types for the IDE and Plugin developers.
3.  **JSON Schemas**: Auto-generated schemas for VS Code IntelliSense.

**Guiding Principle:** *"Strict Types, No Logic"*

## 🚀 Installation

```bash
pnpm install @objectstack/spec
```

## 📦 Architecture

The specification is organized into five namespaces mapping to the three-layer architecture:

### 1. Data Protocol (`src/data`) - *ObjectQL*
*Business Kernel & Data Logic*
*   `Object`, `Field`, `Validation`
*   `Query` (AST), `Driver` (Interface), `Datasource`
*   `Permission`, `Sharing`, `Flow`

### 2. AI Protocol (`src/ai`) - *ObjectQL*
*Intelligence & Orchestration*
*   `Agent` (Orchestration), `RAG` (Retrieval)
*   `Model` (Registry), `Prompt`

### 3. UI Protocol (`src/ui`) - *ObjectUI*
*Presentation & Interaction*
*   `App`, `Page`, `View` (Grid/Kanban)
*   `Dashboard` (Widgets), `Report`
*   `Action` (Triggers)

### 4. System Protocol (`src/system`) - *ObjectOS*
*Runtime Infrastructure & Security*
*   `Manifest` (Config), `Identity` (Auth)
*   `Role` (RBAC), `Tenant` (Isolation)
*   `Events` (Bus), `Plugin` (Lifecycle)

### 5. API Protocol (`src/api`) - *ObjectOS*
*Connectivity & Contracts*
*   `Contract` (DTOs), `Endpoint` (Gateway)
*   `Discovery` (Metadata), `Realtime` (Socket)

## 📚 Usage

### 🤖 AI Quick Reference

**For AI Agents and LLMs:** This package is the single source of truth for ObjectStack protocol definitions. When working with ObjectStack:

1. **Import Patterns**: Always use namespace imports (`Data.Field`, `UI.View`) or direct subpath imports
2. **Validation**: Use Zod schemas for runtime validation (e.g., `ObjectSchema.parse(config)`)
3. **Type Inference**: Derive TypeScript types from Zod (`type Field = z.infer<typeof FieldSchema>`)
4. **Naming Convention**: 
   - Configuration keys (TypeScript properties): `camelCase` (e.g., `maxLength`, `defaultValue`)
   - Machine names (data values): `snake_case` (e.g., `name: 'todo_task'`, `field: 'due_date'`)
5. **Context Files**: Load prompts from `prompts/` directory for architectural understanding

**Common Tasks:**
```typescript
// Define an Object
import { Data } from '@objectstack/spec';
const task: Data.Object = {
  name: 'todo_task',
  fields: {
    subject: { type: 'text', label: 'Subject', required: true },
    priority: { type: 'number', min: 1, max: 5 }
  }
};

// Validate at runtime
import { ObjectSchema } from '@objectstack/spec/data';
const result = ObjectSchema.safeParse(task);

// Define an App
import { UI } from '@objectstack/spec';
const app: UI.App = {
  id: 'crm',
  name: 'CRM',
  navigation: { /* ... */ }
};
```

### Import Styles

**Important:** This package does NOT export types at the root level to prevent naming conflicts. You must use one of the following import styles:

### 🤖 AI-Ready Context

This package includes a `prompts/` directory in the package root containing system instructions and architectural context:

```
node_modules/@objectstack/spec/prompts/
├── architecture.md    # System architecture overview
├── plugin/           # Plugin development guides
└── development/      # Development workflows
```

These prompts are useful for:
1.  **AI Agents**: Creating agents that understand ObjectStack.
2.  **IDE Context**: Adding `node_modules/@objectstack/spec/prompts/*.md` to your Cursor/Copilot context.
3.  **LLM Auto-Discovery**: The `llms.txt` file in the repository root provides a knowledge base for autonomous agents.

```typescript
// If using Vite/bundler with raw import support
import context from '@objectstack/spec/prompts/architecture.md?raw';

// Or read from disk in Node.js
import fs from 'fs';
import path from 'path';
const context = fs.readFileSync(
  path.join(process.cwd(), 'node_modules/@objectstack/spec/prompts/architecture.md'),
  'utf-8'
);
```

#### 1. Namespace Imports from Root

Import protocol namespaces from the package root:

```typescript
import { Data, UI, System, AI, API } from '@objectstack/spec';

const field: Data.Field = {
  name: 'task_name',
  type: 'text',
  label: 'Task Name',
};

const user: System.User = {
  id: 'user_123',
  email: 'user@example.com',
  // ...
};

const agent: AI.Agent = {
  name: 'sales_assistant',
  // ...
};
```

**Pros:**
- Single import line for multiple protocols
- Clear namespace boundaries
- No naming conflicts

#### 2. Namespace Imports via Subpath

Import protocol domains individually:

```typescript
import * as Data from '@objectstack/spec/data';
import * as UI from '@objectstack/spec/ui';
import * as System from '@objectstack/spec/system';
import * as AI from '@objectstack/spec/ai';
import * as API from '@objectstack/spec/api';

const field: Data.Field = {
  name: 'task_name',
  type: 'text',
  label: 'Task Name',
};

const user: System.User = {
  id: 'user_123',
  email: 'user@example.com',
  // ...
};
```

**Pros:**
- Explicit about which protocols are used
- Better tree-shaking (only imports needed protocols)
- Clear namespace boundaries

#### 3. Direct Subpath Imports

Import specific types from subpaths:

```typescript
import { Field, FieldType, ObjectSchema } from '@objectstack/spec/data';
import { User, Session } from '@objectstack/spec/system';
import { App, View } from '@objectstack/spec/ui';

const field: Field = {
  name: 'task_name',
  type: 'text',
  label: 'Task Name',
};

const user: User = {
  id: 'user_123',
  email: 'user@example.com',
  // ...
};
```

**Pros:**
- Most concise syntax
- Good for importing specific types
- No namespace prefix needed

**Cons:**
- Need to know which subpath contains each type
- Multiple import statements for different protocols

### Validation (Runtime)

```typescript
// Style 1: Namespace from root
import { Data } from '@objectstack/spec';
const result = Data.ObjectSchema.safeParse(userConfig);

// Style 2: Namespace via subpath
import * as Data from '@objectstack/spec/data';
const result = Data.ObjectSchema.safeParse(userConfig);

// Style 3: Direct subpath import
import { ObjectSchema } from '@objectstack/spec/data';
const result = ObjectSchema.safeParse(userConfig);

if (!result.success) {
  console.error("Invalid Object definition", result.error);
}
```

### Type Definitions (Compile Time)

```typescript
// Style 1: Namespace from root
import type { Data } from '@objectstack/spec';
const myField: Data.Field = {
  name: "task_name",
  type: "text",
  label: "Task Name"
};

// Style 2: Direct subpath import
import type { Field } from '@objectstack/spec/data';
const myField: Field = {
  name: "task_name",
  type: "text",
  label: "Task Name"
};
```

Using namespace imports for multiple protocols:

```typescript
import type * as Data from '@objectstack/spec/data';
import type * as System from '@objectstack/spec/system';

const field: Data.Field = { /* ... */ };
const user: System.User = { /* ... */ };
```

### JSON Schema (Tooling)
The package includes valid JSON Schemas in the `/json-schema` directory.
These can be used with:
*   [Ajv](https://ajv.js.org/) (High-performance validator)
*   [React Json Schema Form](https://rjsf-team.github.io/) (Auto-forms)
*   VS Code `json.schemas` setting for IntelliSense.

## 🛠️ Development

### Build & Generate

```bash
# Generate JSON Schemas + Markdown Docs + Compile TS
pnpm build
```

### Testing

This package includes comprehensive test coverage for all Zod schemas using **Vitest**.

```bash
# Run tests once
pnpm test

# Run tests in watch mode
pnpm test:watch

# Run tests with coverage report
pnpm test:coverage
```

#### Test Structure

Tests are co-located with schema files using the `.test.ts` suffix:

```text
src/
├── data/
│   ├── field.zod.ts       # Schema definition
│   ├── field.test.ts      # Tests
│   ├── object.zod.ts
│   └── object.test.ts
├── ui/
│   ├── view.zod.ts
│   └── view.test.ts
└── system/
    ├── manifest.zod.ts
    └── manifest.test.ts
```

#### Test Coverage

Each test file includes:
*   **Schema Validation Tests**: Verify valid inputs pass and invalid inputs fail
*   **Default Value Tests**: Ensure default values are applied correctly
*   **Type Tests**: Test discriminated unions and type narrowing
*   **Constraint Tests**: Validate naming conventions (snake_case), regex patterns, enums
*   **Real-World Examples**: Complete, realistic examples from CRM, HR, Sales domains

**Current Coverage**: 263 tests across 13 test files with 100% coverage for tested schemas.

#### Writing Tests

When adding new schemas, follow these patterns:

```typescript
import { describe, it, expect } from 'vitest';
import { YourSchema } from './your-schema.zod';

describe('YourSchema', () => {
  it('should accept valid data', () => {
    const valid = { /* valid data */ };
    expect(() => YourSchema.parse(valid)).not.toThrow();
  });

  it('should reject invalid data', () => {
    const invalid = { /* invalid data */ };
    expect(() => YourSchema.parse(invalid)).toThrow();
  });

  it('should apply defaults', () => {
    const result = YourSchema.parse({ /* minimal data */ });
    expect(result.someField).toBe('default-value');
  });
});
```

### Directory Structure

```text
packages/spec/
├── src/                # Source Truth (Zod)
│   ├── data/           # ObjectQL Protocol
│   ├── ui/             # ObjectUI Protocol
│   └── system/         # ObjectOS Protocol
├── json-schema/        # Auto-generated (npm run gen:schema)
├── dist/               # Compiled JS/D.TS
└── vitest.config.ts    # Test configuration
```

Commit message:

feat(docs): Add AI Development Context sections to README files across multiple packages

packages/spec/README.md, after:

# @objectstack/spec

ObjectStack Protocol & Specification — The "Constitution" of the Ecosystem.

[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.3-blue.svg)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## 📜 Mission

This package defines the **DNA** of ObjectStack. It contains:
1.  **Zod Schemas**: Runtime validation for the Kernel and CLI.
2.  **TypeScript Interfaces**: `z.infer<>` types for the IDE and Plugin developers.
3.  **JSON Schemas**: Auto-generated schemas for VS Code IntelliSense.

**Guiding Principle:** *"Strict Types, No Logic"*

## 🤖 AI Development Context

**Role**: Protocol Definition (Source of Truth)
**Usage**: 
- Import Zod schemas from here for validation.
- Import Types from here for type safety.
- DO NOT implement business logic here.
- DO NOT duplicate schemas in other packages; import from here.

**Key Exports**:
- `Data.ObjectSchema` -> The definition of a Business Object.
- `Data.FieldSchema` -> Sub-schema for fields.
- `UI.ViewSchema` -> Definition of UI Views.

## 🚀 Installation

```bash
pnpm install @objectstack/spec
```

## 📦 Architecture

The specification is organized into five namespaces mapping to the three-layer architecture:

### 1. Data Protocol (`src/data`) - *ObjectQL*
*Business Kernel & Data Logic*
*   `Object`, `Field`, `Validation`
*   `Query` (AST), `Driver` (Interface), `Datasource`
*   `Permission`, `Sharing`, `Flow`

### 2. AI Protocol (`src/ai`) - *ObjectQL*
*Intelligence & Orchestration*
*   `Agent` (Orchestration), `RAG` (Retrieval)
*   `Model` (Registry), `Prompt`

### 3. UI Protocol (`src/ui`) - *ObjectUI*
*Presentation & Interaction*
*   `App`, `Page`, `View` (Grid/Kanban)
*   `Dashboard` (Widgets), `Report`
*   `Action` (Triggers)

### 4. System Protocol (`src/system`) - *ObjectOS*
*Runtime Infrastructure & Security*
*   `Manifest` (Config), `Identity` (Auth)
*   `Role` (RBAC), `Tenant` (Isolation)
*   `Events` (Bus), `Plugin` (Lifecycle)

### 5. API Protocol (`src/api`) - *ObjectOS*
*Connectivity & Contracts*
*   `Contract` (DTOs), `Endpoint` (Gateway)
*   `Discovery` (Metadata), `Realtime` (Socket)

## 📚 Usage

### 🤖 AI Quick Reference

**For AI Agents and LLMs:** This package is the single source of truth for ObjectStack protocol definitions. When working with ObjectStack:

1. **Import Patterns**: Always use namespace imports (`Data.Field`, `UI.View`) or direct subpath imports
2. **Validation**: Use Zod schemas for runtime validation (e.g., `ObjectSchema.parse(config)`)
3. **Type Inference**: Derive TypeScript types from Zod (`type Field = z.infer<typeof FieldSchema>`)
4. **Naming Convention**: 
   - Configuration keys (TypeScript properties): `camelCase` (e.g., `maxLength`, `defaultValue`)
   - Machine names (data values): `snake_case` (e.g., `name: 'todo_task'`, `field: 'due_date'`)
5. **Context Files**: Load prompts from `prompts/` directory for architectural understanding

**Common Tasks:**
```typescript
// Define an Object
import { Data } from '@objectstack/spec';
const task: Data.Object = {
  name: 'todo_task',
  fields: {
    subject: { type: 'text', label: 'Subject', required: true },
    priority: { type: 'number', min: 1, max: 5 }
  }
};

// Validate at runtime
import { ObjectSchema } from '@objectstack/spec/data';
const result = ObjectSchema.safeParse(task);

// Define an App
import { UI } from '@objectstack/spec';
const app: UI.App = {
  id: 'crm',
  name: 'CRM',
  navigation: { /* ... */ }
};
```

### Import Styles

**Important:** This package does NOT export types at the root level to prevent naming conflicts. You must use one of the following import styles:

### 🤖 AI-Ready Context

This package includes a `prompts/` directory in the package root containing system instructions and architectural context:

```
node_modules/@objectstack/spec/prompts/
├── architecture.md    # System architecture overview
├── plugin/           # Plugin development guides
└── development/      # Development workflows
```

These prompts are useful for:
1.  **AI Agents**: Creating agents that understand ObjectStack.
2.  **IDE Context**: Adding `node_modules/@objectstack/spec/prompts/*.md` to your Cursor/Copilot context.
3.  **LLM Auto-Discovery**: The `llms.txt` file in the repository root provides a knowledge base for autonomous agents.

```typescript
// If using Vite/bundler with raw import support
import context from '@objectstack/spec/prompts/architecture.md?raw';

// Or read from disk in Node.js
import fs from 'fs';
import path from 'path';
const context = fs.readFileSync(
  path.join(process.cwd(), 'node_modules/@objectstack/spec/prompts/architecture.md'),
  'utf-8'
);
```

#### 1. Namespace Imports from Root

Import protocol namespaces from the package root:

```typescript
import { Data, UI, System, AI, API } from '@objectstack/spec';

const field: Data.Field = {
  name: 'task_name',
  type: 'text',
  label: 'Task Name',
};

const user: System.User = {
  id: 'user_123',
  email: 'user@example.com',
  // ...
};

const agent: AI.Agent = {
  name: 'sales_assistant',
  // ...
};
```

**Pros:**
- Single import line for multiple protocols
- Clear namespace boundaries
- No naming conflicts

#### 2. Namespace Imports via Subpath

Import protocol domains individually:

```typescript
import * as Data from '@objectstack/spec/data';
import * as UI from '@objectstack/spec/ui';
import * as System from '@objectstack/spec/system';
import * as AI from '@objectstack/spec/ai';
import * as API from '@objectstack/spec/api';

const field: Data.Field = {
  name: 'task_name',
  type: 'text',
  label: 'Task Name',
};

const user: System.User = {
  id: 'user_123',
  email: 'user@example.com',
  // ...
};
```

**Pros:**
- Explicit about which protocols are used
- Better tree-shaking (only imports needed protocols)
- Clear namespace boundaries

#### 3. Direct Subpath Imports

Import specific types from subpaths:

```typescript
import { Field, FieldType, ObjectSchema } from '@objectstack/spec/data';
import { User, Session } from '@objectstack/spec/system';
import { App, View } from '@objectstack/spec/ui';

const field: Field = {
  name: 'task_name',
  type: 'text',
  label: 'Task Name',
};

const user: User = {
  id: 'user_123',
  email: 'user@example.com',
  // ...
};
```

**Pros:**
- Most concise syntax
- Good for importing specific types
- No namespace prefix needed

**Cons:**
- Need to know which subpath contains each type
- Multiple import statements for different protocols

### Validation (Runtime)

```typescript
// Style 1: Namespace from root
import { Data } from '@objectstack/spec';
const result = Data.ObjectSchema.safeParse(userConfig);

// Style 2: Namespace via subpath
import * as Data from '@objectstack/spec/data';
const result = Data.ObjectSchema.safeParse(userConfig);

// Style 3: Direct subpath import
import { ObjectSchema } from '@objectstack/spec/data';
const result = ObjectSchema.safeParse(userConfig);

if (!result.success) {
  console.error("Invalid Object definition", result.error);
}
```

### Type Definitions (Compile Time)

```typescript
// Style 1: Namespace from root
import type { Data } from '@objectstack/spec';
const myField: Data.Field = {
  name: "task_name",
  type: "text",
  label: "Task Name"
};

// Style 2: Direct subpath import
import type { Field } from '@objectstack/spec/data';
const myField: Field = {
  name: "task_name",
  type: "text",
  label: "Task Name"
};
```

Using namespace imports for multiple protocols:

```typescript
import type * as Data from '@objectstack/spec/data';
import type * as System from '@objectstack/spec/system';

const field: Data.Field = { /* ... */ };
const user: System.User = { /* ... */ };
```

### JSON Schema (Tooling)
The package includes valid JSON Schemas in the `/json-schema` directory.
These can be used with:
*   [Ajv](https://ajv.js.org/) (High-performance validator)
*   [React Json Schema Form](https://rjsf-team.github.io/) (Auto-forms)
*   VS Code `json.schemas` setting for IntelliSense.

## 🛠️ Development

### Build & Generate

```bash
# Generate JSON Schemas + Markdown Docs + Compile TS
pnpm build
```

### Testing

This package includes comprehensive test coverage for all Zod schemas using **Vitest**.

```bash
# Run tests once
pnpm test

# Run tests in watch mode
pnpm test:watch

# Run tests with coverage report
pnpm test:coverage
```

#### Test Structure

Tests are co-located with schema files using the `.test.ts` suffix:

```text
src/
├── data/
│   ├── field.zod.ts       # Schema definition
│   ├── field.test.ts      # Tests
│   ├── object.zod.ts
│   └── object.test.ts
├── ui/
│   ├── view.zod.ts
│   └── view.test.ts
└── system/
    ├── manifest.zod.ts
    └── manifest.test.ts
```

#### Test Coverage

Each test file includes:
*   **Schema Validation Tests**: Verify valid inputs pass and invalid inputs fail
*   **Default Value Tests**: Ensure default values are applied correctly
*   **Type Tests**: Test discriminated unions and type narrowing
*   **Constraint Tests**: Validate naming conventions (snake_case), regex patterns, enums
*   **Real-World Examples**: Complete, realistic examples from CRM, HR, Sales domains

**Current Coverage**: 263 tests across 13 test files with 100% coverage for tested schemas.

#### Writing Tests

When adding new schemas, follow these patterns:

```typescript
import { describe, it, expect } from 'vitest';
import { YourSchema } from './your-schema.zod';

describe('YourSchema', () => {
  it('should accept valid data', () => {
    const valid = { /* valid data */ };
    expect(() => YourSchema.parse(valid)).not.toThrow();
  });

  it('should reject invalid data', () => {
    const invalid = { /* invalid data */ };
    expect(() => YourSchema.parse(invalid)).toThrow();
  });

  it('should apply defaults', () => {
    const result = YourSchema.parse({ /* minimal data */ });
    expect(result.someField).toBe('default-value');
  });
});
```

### Directory Structure

```text
packages/spec/
├── src/                # Source Truth (Zod)
│   ├── data/           # ObjectQL Protocol
│   ├── ui/             # ObjectUI Protocol
│   └── system/         # ObjectOS Protocol
├── json-schema/        # Auto-generated (npm run gen:schema)
├── dist/               # Compiled JS/D.TS
└── vitest.config.ts    # Test configuration
```
