content/docs/references/ai/agent.mdx, before:

---
title: Agent
description: Agent protocol schemas
---

AI Model Configuration

<Callout type="info">
**Source:** `packages/spec/src/ai/agent.zod.ts`
</Callout>

## TypeScript Usage

```typescript
import { AIKnowledge, AIModelConfig, AITool, Agent } from '@objectstack/spec/ai';
import type { AIKnowledge, AIModelConfig, AITool, Agent } from '@objectstack/spec/ai';

// Validate data
const result = AIKnowledge.parse(data);
```

---

## AIKnowledge

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **topics** | `string[]` | ✅ | Topics/Tags to recruit knowledge from |
| **indexes** | `string[]` | ✅ | Vector Store Indexes |


---

## AIModelConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **provider** | `Enum<'openai' \| 'azure_openai' \| 'anthropic' \| 'local'>` | optional |  |
| **model** | `string` | ✅ | Model name (e.g. gpt-4, claude-3-opus) |
| **temperature** | `number` | optional |  |
| **maxTokens** | `number` | optional |  |
| **topP** | `number` | optional |  |


---

## AITool

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **type** | `Enum<'action' \| 'flow' \| 'query' \| 'vector_search'>` | ✅ |  |
| **name** | `string` | ✅ | Reference name (Action Name, Flow Name) |
| **description** | `string` | optional | Override description for the LLM |


---

## Agent

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **name** | `string` | ✅ | Agent unique identifier |
| **label** | `string` | ✅ | Agent display name |
| **avatar** | `string` | optional |  |
| **role** | `string` | ✅ | The persona/role (e.g. "Senior Support Engineer") |
| **instructions** | `string` | ✅ | System Prompt / Prime Directives |
| **model** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **tools** | `Object[]` | optional | Available tools |
| **knowledge** | `Object` | optional | RAG access |
| **active** | `boolean` | optional |  |
| **access** | `string[]` | optional | Who can chat with this agent |
| **tenantId** | `string` | optional | Tenant/Organization ID |
| **visibility** | `Enum<'global' \| 'organization' \| 'private'>` | optional |  |


---

Commit message:

feat: Update package documentation and add new protocols
- Updated the package reference documentation to reflect the addition of 5 new packages, increasing the total from 10 to 15.
- Enhanced CLI documentation with new commands and features for better developer experience.
- Introduced new protocol schemas for package registry and state machine, including TypeScript usage examples.
- Added lifecycle properties to AI agent schemas for improved state management.
- Expanded automation protocols with new event and state machine definitions.
- Cleaned up and organized kernel documentation, including new package registry details.
- Removed unused example dependencies from pnpm lock file to streamline package management.

content/docs/references/ai/agent.mdx, after:

---
title: Agent
description: Agent protocol schemas
---

AI Model Configuration

<Callout type="info">
**Source:** `packages/spec/src/ai/agent.zod.ts`
</Callout>

## TypeScript Usage

```typescript
import { AIKnowledge, AIModelConfig, AITool, Agent } from '@objectstack/spec/ai';
import type { AIKnowledge, AIModelConfig, AITool, Agent } from '@objectstack/spec/ai';

// Validate data
const result = AIKnowledge.parse(data);
```

---

## AIKnowledge

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **topics** | `string[]` | ✅ | Topics/Tags to recruit knowledge from |
| **indexes** | `string[]` | ✅ | Vector Store Indexes |


---

## AIModelConfig

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **provider** | `Enum<'openai' \| 'azure_openai' \| 'anthropic' \| 'local'>` | optional |  |
| **model** | `string` | ✅ | Model name (e.g. gpt-4, claude-3-opus) |
| **temperature** | `number` | optional |  |
| **maxTokens** | `number` | optional |  |
| **topP** | `number` | optional |  |


---

## AITool

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **type** | `Enum<'action' \| 'flow' \| 'query' \| 'vector_search'>` | ✅ |  |
| **name** | `string` | ✅ | Reference name (Action Name, Flow Name) |
| **description** | `string` | optional | Override description for the LLM |


---

## Agent

### Properties

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **name** | `string` | ✅ | Agent unique identifier |
| **label** | `string` | ✅ | Agent display name |
| **avatar** | `string` | optional |  |
| **role** | `string` | ✅ | The persona/role (e.g. "Senior Support Engineer") |
| **instructions** | `string` | ✅ | System Prompt / Prime Directives |
| **model** | `Object` | optional |  |
| **lifecycle** | `Object` | optional | State machine defining the agent conversation follow and constraints |
| **tools** | `Object[]` | optional | Available tools |
| **knowledge** | `Object` | optional | RAG access |
| **active** | `boolean` | optional |  |
| **access** | `string[]` | optional | Who can chat with this agent |
| **tenantId** | `string` | optional | Tenant/Organization ID |
| **visibility** | `Enum<'global' \| 'organization' \| 'private'>` | optional |  |


---
